Spatiotemporal Forecasting of Disease Outbreaks: A
Hybrid DBSCAN and Random Forest Approach
IIIT Nagpur
Abstract—Understanding the spatial patterns and forecasting
the trajectory of disease outbreaks is crucial for effective public
health responses. While geographic clustering identifies current
hotspots, traditional public health strategies require predictive
insights to allocate resources proactively. This study proposes
a novel, two-phase spatiotemporal framework applied to geo-
tagged epidemiological data in India. In Phase 1, we utilize
Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
(DBSCAN) to identify irregular outbreak hotspots and filter
geographic anomalies. In Phase 2, we apply a Random Forest
(RF) machine learning model to these localized clusters to predict
future outbreak severity. Unlike ”black box” deep learning
models, our RF approach provides high interpretability through
feature importance, enabling officials to understand the specific
environmental and temporal drivers of localized outbreaks. By
integrating robust spatial analysis with interpretable machine
learning, this framework offers a highly actionable, scalable tool
for strategic mobile health unit deployment.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The dynamic nature of infectious disease outbreaks re-
quires rapid detection, localized intervention, and proactive
forecasting. Traditional public health approaches often fail to
capture the spatial heterogeneity of such outbreaks, resulting in
delayed or inefficient responses. While geographic clustering
provides a powerful tool to detect current spatial patterns, it
lacks the temporal foresight needed to prevent future spread.
To bridge this gap, this paper explores the integration
of geospatial data science and predictive machine learning.
Specifically, we address a critical limitation in modern epi-
demiological modeling: the reliance on ”black box” deep
learning algorithms (such as LSTMs or Neural Networks).
While highly accurate, these models obscure their internal
decision-making processes, making it difficult for public health
officials to understand why an outbreak is occurring and how
to enact specific policy changes to stop it.
Our approach solves this by pairing DBSCAN clustering
with a Random Forest (RF) predictive algorithm. This hybrid
method ensures accurate, localized forecasting while retain-
ing the ”white box” interpretability necessary for actionable
health interventions. The scope of this paper includes defining
the phased methodology, highlighting algorithmic synergies,
and proposing a real-time framework utilizing visualization
libraries like Folium and GeoPandas.
II. L ITERATURE REVIEW
Recent studies have emphasized the importance of spatial
clustering for epidemiological surveillance. Ester et al. (1996)
introduced DBSCAN, which remains highly effective for ir-
regular spatial clusters. Traditionally, spatial data integration
improves health intervention planning, as seen in Zhang et al.
(2022), who analyzed flu outbreaks using DBSCAN to reveal
hidden clusters, and Shaikh et al. (2023), who utilized Folium
to present dynamic heatmaps.
However, moving from descriptive clustering to predictive
modeling requires robust algorithms. While deep learning
has gained traction, recent literature advocates for traditional
Machine Learning (ML) when dealing with real-world, noisy
epidemiological data. Francisco et al. (2024) demonstrated that
a hybrid machine learning approach utilizing Random Forest
and XGBoost significantly improves prediction accuracy over
deep learning models when handling ”zero-inflated” data—a
common occurrence in localized spatial clusters where many
days report zero cases.
Our study builds upon these findings by proposing an end-
to-end framework that utilizes DBSCAN to establish spatial
boundaries and Random Forest to forecast within those lo-
calized environments, ensuring both accuracy and policy-level
interpretability.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
We utilize a dataset of geo-tagged outbreak points alongside
localized environmental variables (e.g., temperature, humidity)
and temporal lag features. Our methodology is structured in
three distinct phases:
A. Phase 1: Spatial Outbreak Detection
We apply the DBSCAN algorithm to the normalized ge-
ographic coordinates. Unlike KMeans, DBSCAN does not
require a predefined number of clusters and easily adapts to
the arbitrary shapes of real-world urban and rural geography.
Most importantly, it identifies isolated cases as noise ( −1),
preventing statistical outliers from skewing the predictive
models in later stages.
B. Phase 2: Spatiotemporal Feature Engineering
Rather than training a single, generalized model for a vast
geographic region, we treat each DBSCAN-identified cluster
as an independent environment. For each cluster, we aggregate
historical time-series data, creating temporal lag features (e.g.,
case counts from 3 days prior, 7 days prior) and integrating
localized meteorological data.
C. Phase 3: Predictive Modeling and Feature Importance
Within each isolated cluster, we deploy a Random Forest
Regressor to forecast future case counts. Because RF is an
ensemble of decision trees, it effectively handles non-linear
disease transmission dynamics without succumbing to the
”black box” limitations of Neural Networks. The RF model
outputs a ”Feature Importance” matrix, explicitly detailing
which variables (e.g., recent rainfall vs. historical case count)
are driving the outbreak in that specific geographic zone.
IV. A LGORITHMS
A. Phase 1: DBSCAN Spatial Clustering
Input:
D: Dataset of points (latitude, longitude)
eps: Radius for neighborhood search
minPts: Minimum number of points to form a cluster
Output:
Cluster labels for each point, or -1 for noise
Algorithm Steps:
1) Mark all points in D as unvisited
2) Initialize cluster label = 0
3) For each unvisited point P in D:
a) Mark P as visited
b) Find all points density-reachable from P within eps
(Neighborhood N)
c) If |N | < minPts: Mark P as noise
d) Else:
i) Create a new cluster and add P
ii) Expand the cluster:
• For each point P’ in N:
– If P’ is not visited: Mark P’ as visited and
find neighbors of P’
– If neighbors ≥ minPts, add them to N
– If P’ is not yet assigned to a cluster, add
P’ to the current cluster
4) Return all cluster labels
B. Phase 3: Random F orest Predictive Modeling
Input:
Ci: Dataset of engineered features for a specific cluster i
T : Number of decision trees in the forest
Output:
Predicted future case count and Feature Importance vector
Algorithm Steps:
1) For t = 1 to T :
a) Draw a bootstrap sample St from Ci.
b) Grow a decision tree from St by recursively repeat-
ing the following steps for each terminal node:
i) Select m variables at random from the total
available features.
ii) Pick the best variable/split-point among the m
to partition the data.
iii) Split the node into two child nodes.
2) Output the ensemble of trees.
3) For a new prediction, average the predictions of the T
trees.
4) Calculate Feature Importance based on the mean de-
crease in impurity across all trees.
C. Centroid Computation for Deployment
Once clusters are validated and predicted to have high future
risk, centroids are calculated to guide the physical deployment
of medical units.
1 cluster_centroids = outbreak_data.groupby(’cluster’)
[[’latitude’, ’longitude’]].mean().reset_index()
Listing 1: Centroid Calculation
V. S TRATEGIC ANALYSIS
To ensure effective deployment of mobile units, this hybrid
approach offers distinct strategic advantages:
• Precision Targeting:By utilizing DBSCAN, the machine
learning model only learns the localized transmission
dynamics of a specific hotspot, drastically reducing model
confusion caused by vastly different geographical ter-
rains.
• Policy Actionability: The feature importance extracted
from the Random Forest model informs health authorities
exactly why an outbreak is spreading, allowing for tar-
geted public health campaigns (e.g., mosquito eradication
vs. social distancing).
• Optimized Logistics: Centroid-based deployment de-
rived from predictive risk scores ensures minimized travel
distance for health services, specifically prioritizing areas
forecasted to worsen.
VI. P ROPOSED FRAMEWORK IMPLEMENTATION
Our proposed solution is a dynamic, scalable system in-
tegrating predictive modeling with real-time visualization.
Health departments can upload daily case and environmental
data via a web interface. The backend automatically recalcu-
lates DBSCAN clusters, runs the Random Forest predictions
for each active zone, and updates an interactive Folium map.
Clusters with a predicted spike in cases are flagged, and their
centroid coordinates are transmitted directly to mobile health
units.
The system features automatic alerts to nearby hospitals
and integration with APIs such as Google Maps to streamline
public communication.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
The integration of spatial clustering with interpretable ma-
chine learning creates a highly proactive public health tool.
By utilizing DBSCAN to isolate geographic hotspots and
filter anomalies, we create optimal localized environments for
Random Forest predictive modeling. This hybrid framework
not only accurately forecasts disease trajectory but success-
fully overcomes the ”black box” limitations of modern deep
learning, providing health officials with the actionable insights
needed to deploy resources effectively.
REFERENCES
1) Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., & Xu, X. (1996).
A Density-Based Algorithm for Discovering Clusters in
Large Spatial Databases with Noise.
2) Francisco, M. E., Carvajal, T. M., & Watanabe, K.
(2024). Hybrid Machine Learning Approach to Zero-
Inflated Data Improves Accuracy of Dengue Prediction.
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases , 18(10), e0012599.
3) Zhang, L., Zhao, Y ., & He, J. (2022). Geospatial Flu
Outbreak Detection using DBSCAN. Journal of Epi-
demiological Data Science .
4) Liu, W., & Wang, Z. (2020). Clustering and Forecasting
COVID-19 Data Using KMeans and Time Series Mod-
els. IEEE Transactions on Public Health Informatics .
5) Jayaweera, P. M., et al. (2021). Hybrid Predictive Mod-
eling of Dengue Outbreaks using Machine Learning and
Clustering. BMC Public Health .
6) Shaikh, R., Das, A., & Ghosh, P. (2023). Mapping
the COVID-19 Outbreak in India: A Folium-Based Ap-
proach. Applied Geoinformatics .
7) Scikit-learn Documentation: https://scikit-learn.org/
8) Folium Docs: https://python-visualization.github.io/
folium/
9) Geopandas Docs: https://geopandas.org/en/stable/docs/
